NO

Heredity and environment: Heredity is the characteristics that you have inherited from your parents, for example hair color, eye color, height. Environment is the characteristics that have been influenced by the environment you live in.

What are cells made of: In all human cells there are 46 chromosomes except for sex cells which are 23. You get - 23 from your mother and 23 from your father. Each chromosome consists of a DNA molecule. Each DNA molecule consists of genes that control different characteristics. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes in each cell which together make up our DNA, i.e. our genetic makeup. In each pair, both chromosomes control the same characteristics, except for the 23rd pair which determines sex. If it is XX then it is a girl, but if it is XY then it is a boy.

DNA: The DNA molecule consists of smaller molecules that are joined together. These are called nitrogen bases. The order in which they are joined together determines what the genetic makeup looks like (ACGT). For example, if a nitrogen base is missing or if nitrogen bases switch places, the DNA molecule changes. This change is called a mutation.

Mutation: Many mutations are random, but mutations can be formed due to radioactive radiation or UV radiation. Mutations can lead to disease, such as cancer. Sometimes mutations can lead to characteristics that make it easier to survive. If the DNA in the sex cells is damaged or changed, these changes, called mutations, can be passed on to children. Mutations are usually harmful and can cause disease, but sometimes they can be beneficial.

Cell division: Cell division is when a cell divides to create new cells. First, the cell copies all its contents, including its genetic material, so that each new cell receives the same information. Then the cell divides into two parts, with each new cell receiving an exact copy of the original contents. This happens in the body's normal cells so that we can grow, heal and replace old cells. In gametes, such as eggs and sperm, a special type of cell division occurs where the cell divides twice. The cell divides twice to halve the amount of genetic material, so that each gamete has half the number of chromosomes as a normal cell. This happens because gametes combine with another gamete to make a baby.

Identical twins: Identical twins occur when a fertilized egg divides into two parts after fertilization. These two parts develop into two babies that have exactly the same genetic material. This is why identical twins often look alike and are always the same sex.
Fraternal twins: Fraternal twins occur when two eggs are fertilized by two different sperm at the same time. They develop as two separate babies in the womb. Fraternal twins can be of the same or different sexes, and they look no more alike than regular siblings.

Dominant and recessive inheritance: If the mother and father have different eye colors, the child's eye color depends on which inheritances it inherits. The inheritance for brown eyes is stronger (dominant) than the inheritance for blue eyes (recessive).
If the child receives a brown inheritance from one parent and a blue one from the other, the child will have brown eyes, because brown is dominant. For the child to have blue eyes, it must inherit a blue inheritance from both parents.

Biotechnology: Any method that uses cells or parts of cells to produce food or other products.

Genetic engineering: When genes are used to investigate or change hereditary traits.

Breeding: Breeding is when people plan and choose which animals or plants will reproduce to produce desired characteristics. This can involve producing faster horses, dogs with a certain appearance, or crops that yield higher yields. By mating or crossing individuals with the desired characteristics, these can be passed on to the next generation.

GMO: GMO involves changing the genes of living organisms by directly interfering with their cells. This allows for the development of desirable traits more quickly.

GMOs can improve traits such as:
Plants that are more resistant to drought and pests.
Crops that grow faster or yield larger yields.
Food with better nutritional content, such as rice with more vitamins.
Animals that grow faster or are more resistant to disease.
The risks of GMOs are that genes can spread to areas where they were not previously found, which can affect the ecosystem in unpredictable ways. In addition, genetic variation can decrease, making species more sensitive to diseases and changes in the environment.

The evolution of life
4.6 billion years ago: The Earth was formed after the Big Bang.
4 billion years ago: The first simple life forms, such as bacteria, appeared on Earth.
3 billion years ago: Blue-green bacteria (algae) evolved and began to produce oxygen through photosynthesis.
2000 million years ago: The first organisms with a cell nucleus appeared.
1000 million years ago: Multicellular organisms began to form, which led to the emergence of plants and animals such as red algae.
500 million years ago: The first vertebrates evolved in the oceans.
400 million years ago: The first animals and simple plants adapted to life on land.
300 million years ago: Insects and other animals such as amphibians
began to spread on land.
200 million years ago: Dinosaurs evolved
150 million years ago: The first birds emerged as an evolution from dinosaurs.
Millions of years ago: Humans
Genetics: The study of heredity. You are made up of genes, inheritance and environment.
DNA: The smallest piece of an inheritance. It is made up of nitrogen bases.
Chromosome: We are made up of 46 chromosomes. In coiled DNA. X and Y.
Cell nucleus: The head of the cell. This is where DNA, chromosomes and genes are found.
Genetic engineering: When you change DNA, for example by cutting with pruning shears.
GMO: Genetically modified organism. Genetic engineering with plants and animals.
Gene therapy: We create medicines through genetic engineering.

